Extensibility docs (#1399)
kyma-project/busola: docs/extensibility/resources.md

# Resource-based extensions

## Introduction

Resource-based extensions are means for users to introduce custom resource pages to Busola. To achieve that, you need to create a Config Map in the `kube-public` Namespace with a label `busola.io/extension=resource`.

The Config Map needs to have several fields created that define how the resources are handled.

All sections can be provided as either JSON or YAML.

## Config Map sections

### resource section

The `resource` section is required and contains basic information about the resource. For example, `kind` and api details.

#### Example

```json
{
  "kind": "MyResource",
  "group": "networking.istio.io",
  "version": "v1alpha3"
}
```

### navigation section

> The `navigation` section is required and defines this resource availability in the menu and the generated url. The name of the menu entry as well as category that it's going to be placed in are read from the translation section entries `name` and `category` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `navigation` section is required and defines this resource availability in the menu and the generated url. The name of the menu entry and the category that it's going to be placed in are read from the `translation` section entries `name` and `category` respectively.
```

#### Item paremeters

- **path** - path for this resource used in the url.
- **scope** - either `namespace` or `cluster`.

#### Example

```json
{
  "path": "my-resources",
  "scope": "namespace"
}
```

### form section

The `form` section modifies the original schema (provided in the schema section) for use with [ui-schema](https://ui-schema.bemit.codes/) to generate the create/edit form for the resource. It contains a list of objects that define which fields must be included in the final form. All given fields are placed in the advanced form by default. It's possible to add a field to simple form by providing the `simple: true` flag, or removing it from advanced form by providing the `advanced: false` flag.

#### Item parameters

> - **path** - _[required]_ path to the property that must be displayed in the form. In case of an array the array index is omitted. For example, if `spec.items` is an array and you want to display `name` for each items, the path is `spec.items.name`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **path** - _[required]_ path to the property that must be displayed in the form. In case of an array the array index is omitted. For example, if `spec.items` is an array and you want to display `name` for each items, the path is `spec.items.name`.
```

> - **widget** - optional widget to render the field. If no widget is provided a default handler is used depending on the data type provided in the schema. For more information about the available widgets, see [Form widgets](form-widgets.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **widget** - optional widget to render the field. If no widget is provided, a default handler is used depending on the data type provided in the schema. For more information about the available widgets, see [Form widgets](form-widgets.md).
```

- **simple** - to display in the simple form. By default it is false.
- **advanced** - to display in the advanced form. By default it is true.

### Example

```json
[
  { "path": "spec.priority", "simple": true },
  { "path": "spec.items.name" },
  { "path": "spec.items.service.url" },
  { "path": "spec.items.service.port" }
]
```

### list section

> The `list` section defines extra columns available in the list. The format is similar to the form section, however each entry consists only of two values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `list` section defines extra columns available in the list. The format is similar to the `form` section, however each entry consists only of two values:
```

#### Item parameters

- **path** - _[required]_ contains the path to the data used for the column.

> - **widget** - optional widget used to render the field. By default the value is displayed verbatim. For more information about the available widgets, see [Display widgets](display-widgets.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **widget** - optional widget used to render the field. By default the value is displayed verbatim. For more information about the available widgets, see [Display widgets](display-widgets.md).
```
What type of field this parameter renders? If it's not specific use `a field`. If it's specific please provide more details (e.g. object field, array field,...)

#### Example

```json
[{ "path": "spec.url" }, { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }]
```

### details section

> The `details` section defines the display structure for the details page. It contains two sections, `header` and `body`, both of which are a list of item to display in the header section and the body of the page respectively. The format of the entries is similar to the form section, however it has extra options available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `details` section defines the display structure for the details page. It contains two sections, `header` and `body`, both of which are a list of items to display in the `header` section and the body of the page respectively. The format of the entries is similar to the `form` section, however it has extra options available.
```

#### Items parameteres

> - **path** - contains the path to the data used for the widget. Not required for purely presentational widgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **path** - contains the path to the data used for the widget. Not required for presentational widgets.
```

> - **name** - used for entries without `path` to define the translation source used for labels. Required if no path is present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **name** - used for entries without `path` to define the translation source used for labels. Required if no `path` is present.
```

> - **widget** - optional widget to render the field. By default the value is displayed verbatim. For more information about the available widgets, see [Display widgets](display-widgets.md).

Reviewer: Can you provide more information about the type of field this parameter renders?

> - **children** - a list of child widgets to be used for all `object` and `array` type of fields. Not available for header widgets.

Reviewer: `child` or `children`?

Extra parameters might be available for specific widgets.

#### Example

```json
{
  "header": [
    { "path": "metadata.name" },
    { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }
  ],
  "body": [
    {
      "name": "columns",
      "widget": "Columns",
      "children": [
        { "name": "left-panel", "widget": "Panel" },
        { "name": "right-panel", "widget": "Panel" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "name": "summary",
      "widget": "Panel",
      "children": [
        { "path": "metadata.name" },
        { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.details",
      "widget": "CodeViewer",
      "language": "json"
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.configPatches",
      "widget": "Panel",
      "children": [{ "path": "applyTo" }, { "path": "match.context" }]
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.configPatches",
      "widget": "Table",
      "children": [{ "path": "applyTo" }, { "path": "match.context" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Data scoping

> Whenever an entry has both `path` and `children` properties, the paths of children are relative to the parent. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever an entry has both `path` and `children` properties, the paths of `children` are relative to the parent. For example:
```

```json
[
  {
    "path": "spec",
    "widget": "Panel",
    "children": [{ "path": "entry1" }, { "path": "entry2" }]
  }
]
```

renders the same set of data as:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "spec",
    "widget": "Panel",
    "children": [{ "path": "spec.entry1" }, { "path": "spec.entry2" }]
  }
]
```

### schema section

The `schema` section contains the JSON-schema definition of the resource. In most cases this is copied verbatim from the CRD.

### translations sections

This section can be provided as a single `translations` section that contains all available languages, formatted for i18next either as YAML or JSON, based on their paths.

#### Predefined translation keys

> - **category** - the name of a category to use for the left-hand menu. By default it is placed into a **Custom Resources** category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **category** - the name of a category used for the left-hand menu. By default it is placed into a **Custom Resources** category.
```

- **name** - title used in the navigation and on the list screen. It defaults to its resource kind.

> - **description** - a more in-depth description of the resorce displaye on the list screen. It is only displayed if present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **description** - a more in-depth description of the resource displayed on the list screen. It is only displayed if present.
```

# Resource-based extensions

## Introduction

Resource-based extensions are a means of introducing custom resource pages to busola. To achieve that a Config Map needs to be created in the `kube-public` namespace with a label `busola.io/extension=resource`.

The Config Map needs to have several fields created that define how the resources is handled.

All sections can be provided as either json or yaml.

## Config Map sections

### `resource` section

The resource section is required and contains basic information about the resource - namely kind and api details.

#### Example

```json
{

>   "kind": "MyResources",

Reviewer 2: In my opinion, there should be something different than `kind`. Kind property is always in singular form but there we have to provide kind in plural which can be confusing

Reviewer 3: I've already pointed it [in the comment](https://github.com/kyma-project/busola/pull/1336#discussion_r887997893), it will be fixed in #1395

#### Item parameters

- **path** - _[required]_ path to the property that should be displayed in the form. In case of an array the array index is ommited (so for instance if `spec.items` is an array and we want to display `name` for each items, the path would simply be `spec.items.name`).
- **widget** - optional widget to render the field. If no widget is provided a default handler will be used depending on the data type provided in the schema. For more information about the available widgets see [Form widgets](form-widgets.md).
- **simple** - whether to display in the simple form. By default it is false.
- **advanced** - whether to diplay in the advanced form. By default it is true.

### Example

```json
[
  { "path": "spec.priority", "simple": true },
  { "path": "spec.items.name" },
  { "path": "spec.items.service.url" },
  { "path": "spec.items.service.port" }
]
```

### `list` section

List section defines extra columns available in the list. The format is similar to the form section, however each entry consists only of two values:

#### Item parameters

- **path** - _[required]_ contains the path to the data to use for the column.

> - **widget** - optional widget used to render the field. By default the value will be displayed verbatim. For more information about the available widgets see [Display widgets](display-widgets.md).

Reviewer 2: We are missing information about the `name` property which can be used to specify the name of the column

Author: the name of the column is taken from i18n based on path

#### Example

```json
[{ "path": "spec.url" }, { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }]
```

### `details` section

Details section defines the display structure for the details page. It contains two sections, `header` and `body`, both of which are a list of item to display in the header section and the body of the page respectively. The format of the entries is at the core similar to the form section, however it has extra options available.

The resource section is required and contains basic information about the resource - namely kind and api details.

#### Items parameteres

- **path** - contains the path to the data to use for the widget. Not required for purely presentational widgets.
- **name** - used for entries without `path` to define the translation source used for labels. Required if no path is present.
- **widget** - optional widget to render the field. By default the value will be displayed verbatim. For more information about the available widgets see [Display widgets](display-widgets.md).

> - **children** - a list of child widgets to use for all `object` and `array` type fields. Not available for header widgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **children** - a list of child widgets to be used for all `object` and `array` type of fields. Not available for header widgets.
```

Extra parameters might be available for specific widgets.

#### Example

```json
{
  "header": [
    { "path": "metadata.name" },
    { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }
  ],
  "body": [
    {
      "name": "columns",
      "widget": "Columns",
      "children": [
        { "name": "left-panel", "widget": "Panel" },
        { "name": "right-panel", "widget": "Panel" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "name": "summary",
      "widget": "Panel",
      "children": [
        { "path": "metadata.name" },
        { "path": "spec.priority", "widget": "Badge" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.details",
      "widget": "CodeViewer",
      "language": "json"
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.configPatches",
      "widget": "Panel",
      "children": [{ "path": "applyTo" }, { "path": "match.context" }]
    },
    {
      "path": "spec.configPatches",
      "widget": "Table",

>       "columns": [{ "path": "applyTo" }, { "path": "match.context" }]

Reviewer 2: Using the `Table` widget, the `columns` key doesn't work for me. I changed `columns` to `children` and it started working. 
Using `columns` causes the error below.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/56163767/172806653-a4c8b2e7-5ebe-4b7a-9e6f-972ee835ed7a.png)

Using `children` displays the Table widget properly.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/56163767/172806387-f448e68d-9cf5-4e6f-8c83-02be491328ef.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "widget": "Table",
      "children": [{ "path": "applyTo" }, { "path": "match.context" }]
```

    }
  ]
}
```

> #### Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Whenever an entry has both `path` and `children` properties, the paths of children are going to be relative to the parent. So for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever an entry has both `path` and `children` properties, the paths of children are relative to the parent. For example:
```

```json
[
  {
    "path": "spec",
    "widget": "Panel",
    "children": [{ "path": "entry1" }, { "path": "entry2" }]
  }
]
```

> will render the same set of data as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
renders the same set of data as:
```

```json
[
  {
    "name": "spec",
    "widget": "Panel",
    "children": [{ "path": "spec.entry1" }, { "path": "spec.entry2" }]
  }
]
```

> ### `schema` section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### schema section
```

> Schema contains the JSON-schema definition of the resource. In most cases this should simply be the CRD copied verbatim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `schema` section contains the JSON-schema definition of the resource. In most cases this is the CRD-copied verbatim.
```

> ### `translations` sections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### translations sections
```

> Translations can be provided as a single `translations` section that contains all available languages, formatted for i18next either as yaml or json, based on their paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section can be provided as a single `translations` section that contains all available languages, formatted for i18next either as YAML or JSON, based on their paths.
```

#### Predefined translation keys

> - **category** - the name of a category to use for the left-hand menu. By default it will be placed into a "Custom Resources" category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **category** - the name of a category to use for the left-hand menu. By default it is placed into a custom resources category.
```

> - **name** - title to be used in the navigation and on the list screen. Defaults to it's resource kind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **name** - title you can use in the navigation and on the list screen. It defaults to its resource kind.
```

> - **description** - a more in-depth description of the resorce displaye on the list screen. It's only displayed if present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **description** - a more in-depth description of the resource displayed on the list screen. It is displayed if present.
```

#### Example

```yaml
en:
  category: My category
  name: My Resource
  metadata:
    name: Name
  spec:
    items: Items
de:
  category: meine Kategorie
  name: Meine Ressource
  metadata:
    name: Name
  spec:
    items: Artikel
```

> #### Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Alternatively a `transations-{lang}` sections can be provided for a single language only. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, `translations-{lang}` sections can be provided for a single language only. For example:
```

`translations-en`:

```yaml
category: My category
name: My Resource
metadata:
  name: Name
spec:
  items: Items
```

> `translations-pl`:

Reviewer: `translations-pl` or `translations-de`?
